docs: restructure dataset schema page with introduction and guidance (#2554)
apify/apify-docs: sources/platform/actors/development/actor_definition/dataset_schema/index.md

Reviewer: Consistency with the table at LOC427

```suggestion
        "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
```

sidebar_label: Dataset schema
---

The dataset schema defines the structure and presentation of data produced by an Actor. It controls what fields each dataset item contains and how that data appears in the Output tab UI.

## Schema components

A dataset schema has two main components:

- **`fields`** (optional) - JSON Schema describing the structure of each dataset item. Enables validation and provides metadata for AI agents.
- **`views`** (required) - Display configurations that control how data appears in the Output tab. Each view can show different fields, ordering, and formatting.

Both components work together: `fields` describes *what* data your Actor produces, while `views` controls *how* that data is presented.

```json title=".actor/dataset_schema.json"
{
    "actorSpecification": 1,

>     "fields": { /* JSON Schema describing each item */ },

Author: Instead of these comments, keep there the short examples

sidebar_label: Dataset schema
---

> The dataset schema defines the structure and presentation of data produced by an Actor. It controls what fields each dataset item contains and how that data appears in the Output tab UI.

Reviewer: "Output tab UI" is redundant. The tab is in the UI.

```suggestion
The dataset schema defines the structure and presentation of data produced by an Actor. It controls what fields each dataset item contains and how that data appears in the Output tab.
```

## Schema components

> A dataset schema has two main components:

Reviewer: If there are only two components, no need to use "main"

```suggestion
A dataset schema has two components:
```

- **`fields`** (optional) - JSON Schema describing the structure of each dataset item. Enables validation and provides metadata for AI agents.

> - **`views`** (required) - Display configurations that control how data appears in the Output tab. Each view can show different fields, ordering, and formatting.

Reviewer: Bold is reserved for UI elements so I would not use it here.
Additionally we should flip the order to lead with required and then continue with optional

```suggestion
- `views` _(required)_ - Display configurations for how data appears in the Output tab. Each view can show different fields, ordering, and formatting.
- `fields` _(optional)_ - JSON Schema describing each dataset item. Enables validation and provides metadata for AI agents.
```

> Both components work together: `fields` describes *what* data your Actor produces, while `views` controls *how* that data is presented.

Reviewer: Consider cutting. This sentence rephrases the bullets above.

```suggestion

```

```json title=".actor/dataset_schema.json"
{
    "actorSpecification": 1,
    "fields": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
            "title": { "type": "string" },
            "price": { "type": "number" }
        }
    },
    "views": {
        "overview": {
            "title": "Overview",
            "transformation": { "fields": ["title", "price"] },
            "display": { "component": "table" }
        }
    }
}
```

## File structure

Place the dataset schema in the `.actor` folder in your Actor's root directory. You can organize it in two ways:

> ### Inline in actor.json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Inline in `actor.json`
```

        "overview": {
            "title": "Overview",
            "transformation": {},
            "display": { "component": "table" }
        }
    }
}
```

Use a separate file when your schema is complex or you want to keep `actor.json` concise.

## Fields

> The `fields` property defines the structure of each dataset item using [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/). This schema enables validation and provides metadata that helps both humans and AI agents understand your Actor's output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `fields` property defines the structure of each dataset item using [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/). It enables validation and provides metadata that help humans and AI agents understand your Actor's output.
```

### Why define fields

> When AI agents interact with Actors through the MCP server or API, they rely on field metadata to understand what data the Actor produces. Including `title`, `description`, and `example` properties enables agents to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When AI agents interact with Actors through the MCP server or API, they rely on field metadata to understand the Actor's output. Including `title`, `description`, and `example` properties lets agents:
```

| `example` | any | A sample value that demonstrates the expected format. |
| `enum` | array | A list of allowed values for the field. |

> ### Example with field metadata

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Field metadata example
```

:::tip Naming convention

Use `camelCase` for field names. This matches the convention used in input schemas and ensures consistency across your Actor's configuration.

:::

> For validation options and error handling, see [Dataset validation](./validation.md).

Reviewer: Opportunity to clean up & better phrasing. Leading with verb makes it easier to scan.

```suggestion
See [Dataset validation](./validation.md) for validation options and error handling.
```

## Views

> Views control how data appears in the Output tab UI. Each view defines which fields to show, in what order, and with what formatting.

Reviewer: "Output tab UI" is redundant. The tab is in the UI.

```suggestion
## Views

Views control how data appears in the Output tab. Each view defines which fields to show, their order, their formatting.
```

### Why use views

> Dataset views are like database views - different perspectives on the same data. Instead of showing all fields at once, views present focused subsets. Users find data faster, and AI agents can better understand your output.

Reviewer: Cut to make prose more focused.

```suggestion
Dataset views are like database views - different perspectives on the same data. Instead of showing all fields at once, views present focused subsets.
```

> For a real-world example, see [Google Maps Scraper](https://apify.com/compass/crawler-google-places) which uses views to separate place details from review data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Google Maps Scraper](https://apify.com/compass/crawler-google-places) uses views to separate place details from review data.
```

### When to use views

- **Control field order and formatting** - Without views, fields appear in JSON property order. Views let you order fields logically and format URLs as links, images inline, etc.
- **Expand nested data with `unwind`** - Arrays of nested objects appear collapsed by default. Use `unwind` to expand them into readable rows.

> - **Create focused perspectives** - A scraper with 50+ fields can offer an "Overview" view and a "Details" view. Same data, different focus.

Reviewer: Bold is reserved for UI elements only, we could use italics, but I think with dashes this is distinction enough

```suggestion
- Control field order and formatting - Without views, fields appear in JSON property order. Views let you order fields logically and format URLs as links, images inline, etc.
- Expand nested data with `unwind` - Arrays of nested objects appear collapsed by default. Use `unwind` to expand them into readable rows.
- Create focused perspectives - A scraper with 50+ fields can offer an "Overview" view and a "Details" view. Same data, different focus.
```

A single view is fine for simple Actors with fewer than 10 fields where all fields are equally relevant.

> ### Organizing views by use case

Reviewer: We try not to use gerunds within headings. Simplifies search patterns.

```suggestion
### Organize views by use case
```

The same data often serves different purposes. An e-commerce scraper could offer a "Marketing" view (name, image, description) and a "Pricing" view (price, discount, competitor price). The first view defined becomes the default.

> ### What views are NOT for

Reviewer: I am not sure using caps will yield any value here

```suggestion
### What views are not for
```

> Views show the same data from different angles. They're NOT for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Views show the same data from different angles. Don't use views for:
```

- **Separating unrelated data types** - Storing posts, comments, and profiles in one dataset, then using views to separate them. Use separate datasets for unrelated data types.

> - **Controlling export formats** - Views don't change how data exports to JSON, CSV, or Excel. Export format is set in download options or the Dataset API `format` parameter. Views only affect Console UI display.

Reviewer: Bold is reserved for UI elements only, we could use italics, but I think with dashes this is distinction enough

```suggestion
- Separating unrelated data types - Storing posts, comments, and profiles in one dataset, then using views to separate them. Use separate datasets for unrelated data types.
- Controlling export formats - Views don't change how data exports to JSON, CSV, or Excel. Export format is set in download options or the Dataset API `format` parameter. Views only affect Console UI display.
```

### Basic view example

> The following Actor stores data using `Actor.pushData()`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This Actor stores data using `Actor.pushData()`:
```

```javascript title="main.js"
import { Actor } from 'apify';
await Actor.init();

await Actor.pushData({
    numericField: 10,
    pictureUrl: 'https://www.google.com/images/branding/googlelogo/2x/googlelogo_color_92x30dp.png',
    linkUrl: 'https://google.com',
    textField: 'Google',
    booleanField: true,
    dateField: new Date(),
    arrayField: ['#hello', '#world'],
    objectField: {},
});

await Actor.exit();
```

> Configure the Output tab UI with a dataset schema:

Reviewer: "Output tab UI" is redundant. The tab is in the UI.

```suggestion
Configure the Output tab with a dataset schema:
```

                                "format": "text"
                            },
                            "booleanField": {
                                "label": "Boolean",
                                "format": "boolean"
                            },
                            "arrayField": {
                                "label": "Array",
                                "format": "array"
                            },
                            "objectField": {
                                "label": "Object",
                                "format": "object"
                            },
                            "dateField": {
                                "label": "Date",
                                "format": "date"
                            },
                            "numericField": {
                                "label": "Number",
                                "format": "number"
                            }
                        }
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Each view has two parts:

1. `transformation` - Which fields to fetch and how to transform them

> 2. `display` - How to visually present the data in the UI

Reviewer: Use only 1. for numbered lists. Markdown auto-numbers them at build, which makes the list easier to maintain.

```suggestion
1. `transformation` - Which fields to fetch and how to transform them
1. `display` - How to visually present the data in the UI
```

            },
            "display": {
                "component": "table",
                "properties": {
                    "imageUrl": {
                        "label": "Image",
                        "format": "image"
                    }
                }
            }
        },
        "pricing": {
            "title": "Pricing analysis",
            "description": "Fields for competitive pricing analysis",
            "transformation": {
                "fields": [
                    "productName",
                    "price",
                    "currency",
                    "discountPercent",
                    "competitorPrice",
                    "priceDifference"
                ]
            },
            "display": {
                "component": "table",
                "properties": {
                    "discountPercent": {
                        "label": "Discount %",
                        "format": "number"
                    },
                    "priceDifference": {
                        "label": "vs. Competitor",
                        "format": "number"
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

> The first view defined becomes the default tab.

Reviewer: I would cut this, it is already stated at LOC 213.

> ## Handling nested structures

Reviewer: We try not to use gerunds within headings. Simplifies search patterns.

```suggestion
## Handle nested structures
```

Tabular formats (Output tab table, Excel, CSV) require flat data. If your Actor produces nested JSON structures, transform them using these options:

### Flatten nested objects

Use `transformation.flatten` to convert nested objects into flat key-value pairs:

```json
{
    "transformation": {
        "flatten": ["address"],
        "fields": ["name", "address.street", "address.city"]
    }
}
```

With `flatten: ["address"]`, the object `{"address": {"street": "Main St", "city": "NYC"}}` becomes `{"address.street": "Main St", "address.city": "NYC"}`.

Use the flattened property names (e.g., `address.street`) in both `transformation.fields` and `display.properties`.

### Unwind arrays

Use `transformation.unwind` to expand arrays of nested objects into separate rows:

```json
{
    "transformation": {
        "unwind": ["reviews"],
        "fields": ["productName", "reviewText", "rating"]
    }
}
```

> With `unwind: ["reviews"]`, a product with 5 reviews becomes 5 rows in the output, each containing the product name plus one review's data.

Reviewer: It is better to spell out small numbers

```suggestion
With `unwind: ["reviews"]`, a product with five reviews becomes five rows in the output, each containing the product name plus one review's data.
```

### Flatten in Actor code

> Alternatively, flatten nested structures in your Actor code before calling `Actor.pushData()`.

Reviewer: Single sentence subsections are not the greatest practice. I would recommend removing H3 and folding into previous section.

## Reference

### DatasetSchema object

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |

> | `actorSpecification` | integer | true | Version of the dataset schema structure. Currently only version 1 is available. |

Reviewer: Cleanup opportunity. We should avoid hedging features like this. Only v1 exists. The doc can be updated if and when other versions arrive.

```suggestion
| `actorSpecification` | integer | true | Version of the dataset schema structure. Only version 1 is available. |
```

| `fields` | JSONSchema object | false | Schema of one dataset object using JSON Schema Draft 2020-12 or compatible format. |
| `views` | Object | true | An object containing view definitions. Each key is a view ID, each value is a DatasetView object. |

### DatasetView object

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `title` | string | true | The title shown in the Output tab and API. |
| `description` | string | false | Description of the view. Only available in API responses. |
| `transformation` | ViewTransformation | true | Defines how to fetch and transform data from the Dataset API. |

> | `display` | ViewDisplay | true | Defines how to render data in the Output tab UI. |

Reviewer: "Output tab UI" is redundant. The tab is in the UI.

```suggestion
| `display` | ViewDisplay | true | Defines how to render data in the Output tab. |
```

### ViewTransformation object

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |

> | `fields` | string[] | true | Fields to include in the output. Order determines column order in the UI. Missing field values display as **undefined**. |

Reviewer: I think this is a value, not UI element right? 

```suggestion
| `fields` | string[] | true | Fields to include in the output. Order determines column order in the UI. Missing field values display as `undefined`. |
```
